[DRAMATIC SOUND EFFECTS]
[GAIA MUSIC BUMPER]
[INTENSE MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: In the
thrust of your books,
more than 30 books that
are out there right now,
there is a term
called "egregore."
What is that?
>>MARK STAVISH: What it is a
collective consciousness that
is a group mind.
It works through common
values and common vision.
>>NOORY: Egregores
can be a grouping
of positive or negative.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
That is why we as
individuals need
to have a spiritual path
which helps us to understand
ourselves first and foremost.
>>NOORY: Can you
control the masses
through this kind
of thought process?
>>STAVISH: That's its goal.
The egregores
we're talking about
seek to control you
as an individual.
In fact, they seek to have
your individuality subsumed
into the whole, into the mass.
Your identity is no longer
you as yourself, but you
as "I am a part of that."
Because if we get your
attention, we get your mind.
If we get your mind,
we get your energy.
So if I have your attention,
and I have your energy,
I have the potential
to influence.
You're told everything
will improve your life,
whether it's this political
party, whether it's
this religion, or whether
it's this product that we're
telling you to buy.
People want meaning
in their lives,
and an egregore is a
prepackaged meaning.
[INTENSE MUSIC]
>>NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Our special guest, Mark
Stavish, is a bestselling author
of more than 30 books on
spirituality and self-help.
He's also the
founder and director
of the Institute for
Hermetic Studies.
Mark, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>STAVISH: Thank you, George.
It's great to be here.
>>NOORY: Tell me
a little bit more.
How did you get involved
in all this spirituality?
>>STAVISH: Well, I
grew up around it.
I had family members who
were involved in esotericism
coming from their days in Europe
and here in the United States.
And I had a great uncle
who was deeply involved
in all of the major esoteric
movements of the 20th century.
And since he died
in his 90s, that
meant he had an
experience which spanned
the entire 20th century.
And it was just wonderful to
be around that environment
of openness and
investigation and developing
a personal understanding of what
religion and spirituality mean.
>>NOORY: Did you have
some help, or did you
do this all on your own?
>>STAVISH: No, I had many
wonderful teachers, some
of them, of course,
which I knew personally,
like my great uncle,
and others which
I would go to-- some seminars or
authors which I'd met and known
along the way.
>>NOORY: And what did
they try to teach you?
>>STAVISH: Really, to
become independent,
to become
self-reliant, to, as it
says over the Temple of Apollo
at Delphi in ancient Greece,
"know thyself."
That's really the focus of it.
Come to understand who
you are and where you fit
in to the rest of the universe.
And that's a big question.
But know thyself--
that was the focus.
>>NOORY: And the
thrust of your books,
more than 30 books that
are out there right now--
and they're all amazing.
You would say under what kind
of umbrella would they be?
>>STAVISH: Well, we would
call it Western esotericism,
meaning focusing on those
spiritual traditions--
alchemy, Kabbalah,
astrology, mysticism--
that one sees mostly in the
Mediterranean and Western
Europe.
But if I were to give
it a more concise term--
you want to call
it "hermeticism,"
that might be too limiting.
But it is just that--
the path of inner
initiation, inner awakening,
how to come to know
yourself and bring
that forth into your life.
>>NOORY: There was a
term called "egregore."
What is that?
>>STAVISH: An egregore is--
well, it's a complex term.
It means "watcher."
And what it is is a
collective consciousness,
that is, a group mind.
>>NOORY: Of an individual?
>>STAVISH: Well,
it's always a group.
It can start with
an individual who
has a religious or
philosophical idea,
or as we'll see later,
maybe even a business idea.
But it attracts other people
to it who want to be involved.
>>NOORY: But exactly
what does it do?
>>STAVISH: It limits
the focus of the group.
So when you join a religion
or a political party,
it has ideas and
goals and aspirations.
And it moves you
along to conform
to those ideas and
goals and aspirations
to achieve its goals.
>>NOORY: Now when
you say "it," it
gives me the assumption
it's some kind of entity
or something.
But it's not.
>>STAVISH: Well, that's
the great question.
In modern terms, we
would think of it
as just kind of an amorphous
collective attitude.
But in the classical world,
it was seen as an "It,"
a spiritual being itself,
which you were willingly
attaching yourself to and
had a relationship with.
>>NOORY: Is it a thought form?
>>STAVISH: Well, it can
start as a thought form,
but it grows, because it
grows beyond the individual.
An example would
be like you and I.
We have an aspiration,
whether it's to have a show
or write a book or do
something for physical health
and wellness.
And we create an idea
around that, a thought form,
of our goal.
But we often don't involve
other people in that.
We can do that on our own.
But here's the
thought form which
grows beyond the individual and
takes on a wider aspiration.
People are drawn to it to
help support it and bring it
into realization.
>>NOORY: Give me an example
of how this would function.
>>STAVISH: A political party--
National Socialism, Communism.
It all started with ideas in
the mind of one human being,
and there you have it.
>>NOORY: And that
would be an egregore?
>>STAVISH: That would be an
egregore because they're still
around today.
Even though National Socialism
was defeated in 1945,
we still constantly
feel its presence.
Communism collapsed more
or less in the 1990s,
and we still feel its influence.
>>NOORY: But it could be good.
It could be bad.
>>STAVISH: Well,
that's the point.
Whenever you join a
group-- and that's
really what we're talking about.
Your grandmother said, you're
known by the company you keep.
>>NOORY: True.
>>STAVISH: And
studies have shown
you will become like the five
people you spend the most
time with.
Now that's an egregore.
Whether we want to think of it
as such or not, it becomes one.
So you can identify with
and join your local Rotary,
Kiwanis, groups like
that, where people
are helping the community and
seeking to improve themselves
along the way.
And that can be very
beneficial to you.
Or you can join a group which--
well, you may think it's good.
But it leads you down
a path of suffering.
>>NOORY: Mark, if
you were in a bar
and sat down next to somebody
and said, "I'm an egregore,"
they'd probably throw you out.
>>STAVISH: They would because
I wouldn't say that term.
>>NOORY: They wouldn't
understand it.
>>STAVISH: Right.
Well, that's the
beauty of the term.
All of your listeners have
heard the idea of a group mind.
And that's really what
we're talking about.
The term "egregore"
didn't really
gain a lot of traction
in popular culture
until recently, even
though we do see it
in the writings
of the occultists
of the 19th and 20th century.
But mostly we see
the term "group mind"
or "group consciousness."
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: So if we use
that as a substitute term,
we're going to understand
what an egregore is.
That's important.
We can wrap our
minds around that.
>>NOORY: Now the group mind,
the collective consciousness,
as we call it,
what makes it work?
>>STAVISH: Oh, I don't know.
I mean, that's really
the question, isn't it?
But somehow, just as
our own subconscious
takes all of our-- experiences
it and organizes it for us.
It synthesizes it into a whole.
Somehow, when you get a
lot of people together,
and they're working towards
a common goal or aspiration,
there's a synthesis of their
different minds and attitudes.
It creates common values.
That might be the thing
we could say how it works.
It works through common
values and common vision.
>>NOORY: Could you form an
egregore the way you want it?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: How would you do that?
>>STAVISH: Well, a typical
example would be in business.
You have an idea for a business.
You give it a logo.
You give it a name.
You have a slogan.
And then you start bringing
people in and employees.
And it's doing very well.
Then you start to
take that business,
and you say, well, who
is our ideal employee?
Who is our ideal customer?
Well, a perfect example
would that be in the '50s--
the IBM man.
They all wore-- the man
in the gray flannel suit.
And they all wear the
same suit, the same tie,
the same white shirt.
That would be a very good
example of an egregore forming
over time, where everyone
begins to conform to its-- not
only views of what
the business is about,
but how they as a person, as
an individual, should appear.
>>NOORY: How far back
does that term go, Mark?
>>STAVISH: Well,
I think we could
say it goes back to
the Classical Period
because we do see it in
some ancient literature.
I think it appears in the
Ethiopian "Book of Enoch"
and in other places.
And of course, clearly
in those writings,
it relates to an egregore
as being a living
entity between us here on
Earth and a spiritual being
or beings somewhere
in the invisible.
>>NOORY: Are egregores
formed or created?
>>STAVISH: Well, I think
they can occur organically
when people become acting.
But I think
traditionally we see them
as being created--
that at some point
the idea is, I want to connect
with these invisible forces,
whatever God or deity that
may be or be perceived of.
And then religions start.
Rituals start.
Cults start.
And that's a big part
of it because there
has to be repeated
action and repeated
feeding of the egregore.
Now we say, what
does it feed on?
Well, it's emotions
and devotion.
>>NOORY: Would you say social
networking is an egregore?
>>STAVISH: It has the
potential to be one.
I think we see a lot of it.
I think we see egregores working
through social networking.
I jokingly say that the internet
is kind of the subconscious
mind or the projection
of the subconscious mind
into reality, into
the physical world,
because everyone's thoughts and
ideas can just instantly appear
on it.
So we see the internet
and social media
as being the tools
whereby people
like to have their ideas seeded
into the popular consciousness.
So it's a mechanism for it.
>>NOORY: Can you
control the masses
through this kind
of thought process?
>>STAVISH: That's its goal.
Now those masses may
be a small group.
It may just be those who are
devoted to it, like a religion
or in a small area.
But I think when we
look at mass media
now, that desire for control--
and this is my personal belief--
I believe is near global.
>>NOORY: We saw what
happened during Nazi Germany
in World War II.
Was that an egregore?
>>STAVISH: Perfect
example of one,
yes, through that constant
controlling of the media.
Remember, it's a social
control mechanism,
which means it seeks to control
your thoughts, your ideas.
And if we're
studying engineering,
that's fine, because we need
to limit what we focus on.
It seeks to control
your words, which
is fine, because we need
specific engineering
terms to communicate.
And your actions--
you need to do
things that make you a better
engineer or a sports player,
whatever that happens to be.
But when we move into
the broader arena of you
as an individual, the
egregores we're talking about
seek to control you
as an individual.
In fact, they seek to have
your individuality subsumed
into the whole, into the mass.
Your identity is no longer
you as yourself, but you
as "I am a part of that."
It becomes your
whole identity, which
is what we saw in Nazi Germany,
which we saw in Communism.
And having grown
up around people
who survived the Nazi period
and the Soviet period,
I don't say that loosely.
I say that as a matter of fact.
>>NOORY: Do people
know what's happening
to them when they get involved
in that kind of a situation?
>>STAVISH: No.
And the reason being--
>>NOORY: They get
pulled in, don't they?
>>STAVISH: Well, your
idealism, your emotions,
are what are used against you.
What we see now is many people
being sold a bill of goods
around Utopian ideas.
That's as old as the hills.
Everyone wants a better world.
The question is, how?
The devil, as they
say, is in the details.
So you're told everything
will improve your life,
whether it's this political
party, whether it's
this religion, or whether
it's this product that we're
telling you to buy.
This will make your life better.
So it's your
emotional connection
to this that is what
is used against you
and that pulls you in.
>>NOORY: What does
that tell you,
Mark, about the masses
that get pulled in?
>>STAVISH: People want
meaning in their lives,
and an egregore is a
prepackaged meaning.
>>NOORY: And it could
be any organization?
It could be any kind
of a phrase that's
happening today, whether it's
opposed to the police or not?
People tend to jump
on the bandwagon,
and it grows, and it festers.
Is that what it does, too?
>>STAVISH: Exactly.
I'm not saying not
to have ideals.
What I'm saying is
not to be idealistic.
That is, have good
aspirations for yourself,
but realize people are people
and that what is good for you
may not be good for others.
And when we try to have
a one size fits all,
which is what many of
these social entities do--
and is, again, social
entities that we're seeing.
It's trying to be social
movements and social control.
That's when you have to say,
OK, is this good for me.
>>NOORY: Who determines
what's good and what's not?
>>STAVISH: That's the point.
You as an individual have
to look at your engagement
with everyone and say, you know,
I like being part of this VFW.
I like being part of
this library book club.
I like being part of this--
>>NOORY: But what
about a hate group?
>>STAVISH: Well, people go
to hate groups because they
think it's good for them.
They think that they're
going to benefit from it.
Remember, their
notion of what is good
is what is driving them
forward to that membership.
How you get them to
understand that violence
and anger and aggression
are not good for them--
that's a difficult
haul, because what
you have now is a
large-scale example
of a co-dependent relationship.
These are their family now.
People who are
involved in this-- this
is not unlike organized crime.
Someone would join
organized crime,
and they'd get a new name, or
a gang, they get a new name.
This becomes their family.
So getting people out of that,
or cult extraction, which--
therapies-- are very difficult
and demanding, because people
now have to have an identity.
How do to identify
if I'm not marching
on the street for this cause?
How do I identify if I'm
not working in this business
to sell this product?
How do I be myself if I'm
not devoted to this religion
or this guru or this master?
Who am I?
>>NOORY: Egregores dabble
in some kind of mysticism,
you had mentioned earlier.
How does that make it work?
>>STAVISH: Well, it's a ritual.
We see the notion of egregores
becomes popular, as I said,
in the late 19th century with
the French and British occult
revivals.
And while the term
gets sidelined
by the idea of collective
consciousness or group minds,
it's still there.
So there is a powerful
aspect of this
that involves ritual
and ceremonial magic,
because in those
operations, individuals
use chants and
slogans and increase
their emotional
devotion, if you will,
to the goal which the
ritual is to undertake.
And when that has
to do with worship
of deities or entities of
some kind, or even an ideal,
that emotional energy is
the food of the egregore.
Emotions are the food of
the collective function
of any group.
>>NOORY: Is there
something magical to this?
>>STAVISH: Well, if you're an
occultist, you'll say, yes.
>>NOORY: If you're not?
>>STAVISH: If you're
a psychologist,
you'll say it's
all psychological.
You have to really
take your choice there.
I am of the position
that there is definitely
a chain of beings involved
in these egregores,
especially the larger ones, the
political and religious ones.
And it can be something like the
mystical body of Christ, which
people hear about; the
Communion of Saints;
the bodhisattvas
of Tibetan Buddhism
or other Buddhist
sects; unknown masters.
These are an example
of an egregore
in religion and philosophy.
>>NOORY: On Gaia's "Buzzsaw,"
Sean Stone talked about magic.
>>SEAN STONE: Don't you,
during the course of magic,
encounter entities that
could be described as evil
or put you-- that create evil
or very chaotic, destructive
conditions?
>>JAMES WASSERMAN: You
encounter temptations.
Some people are working a lot
with the goetic or negative
energies, you know?
And I personally
am not doing that.
But there is a flip side
to every positive energy.
And I have certainly
encountered that a lot.
I've witnessed,
experienced, and dealt
with literal demonic possession.
The most evil experience I ever
had was actually standing--
encountering someone in a hotel
bathroom, believe it or not,
who was a very, very,
very wealthy, wealthy guy
who owned the hotel.
My uncle was-- worked for
him, and I went to the hotel
to visit my uncle.
And this guy had such a--
I only met him for
like a second--
had such a depth
of darkness in him
that it still frightens
me to even think of it.
And he was a guy
dressed in a suit
and smiled at me or
something in the way
that people pass each other
in the bathroom, whatever.
But there was a
darkness, an emptiness
at his core, a kind of
grasping that Crowley describes
as the characteristic
of a black brother--
the most evil
force, he or she who
has rejected all love, all
sense of unity and purpose.
And this guy had that.
And it was weird.
It wasn't a magical ceremony.
It wasn't in a temple
with candlelight.
It was in day to day life,
and I've never forgotten it.
>>NOORY: Was he describing
a negative egregore?
>>STAVISH: Oh, most definitely.
And James Wasserman, by the
way, wrote the introduction
of my book.
>>NOORY: And that was James--
>>STAVISH: That was
James Wasserman.
What he described is real.
And we have very
good examples of that
in terms of positive
ones, and we
have very good examples of
that in terms of negative ones,
which he discussed.
And, look, we need to
really look at the egregore
in terms of this has to
do with your relationship
to the invisible.
And ultimately,
we talk about what
is my reason for being
here on planet Earth.
And some people will take
that and grow with it.
Others will just go through and
have as much sensory experience
as they can.
Others will recognize that
they don't really view anything
as existing in the invisible.
But whether you recognize
the invisible or not,
it recognizes you.
And these egregores
have that potential to--
as he said, this
was not in a ritual.
This was a person
who had at some point
given themselves over to evil
in whatever form that was.
>>NOORY: Would
everybody feel that
and pick that up if
they ran into this guy?
>>STAVISH: I think
someone like that.
Most people would
feel that there's
something wrong because we do
have an inherent Spidey sense.
We do have an inherent
protective mechanism,
an intuition, which lets us
know things aren't quite right.
However, how they might then
respond to that information
would have to do with
their willingness
to accept that this
is a dangerous person
and a dangerous experience.
>>NOORY: Yet the guy
apparently was successful.
He was the owner of the hotel.
He seemed to do well.
How could he create that kind
of negativity around himself?
>>STAVISH: Because he's
utterly self-absorbed.
I've worked with a variety of
people from murderers in denim
to white collar criminals.
People don't really understand
that the universe and the world
does not hold their values.
>>NOORY: And do you get that
same feeling that Wasserman did
with these kind of people--
a sense of negative darkness?
>>STAVISH: Just as you can
sense a truly profound niceness,
a graciousness, even a
saintliness on occasion
from someone, if you are
relaxed and are paying attention
to your own inner self,
your own inner mind,
you will also
notice those people
who are dangerous and
threatening to you as well.
>>NOORY: Yet both
of them, both sides,
can influence
individuals, can't they?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
And that is why
we as individuals
need to have a spiritual path
which helps us to understand
ourselves first and
foremost, so that we
can know when someone is
trying to influence us
in a negative way.
Look, evil is a con game.
And as any con
man will tell you,
no one is innocent in a con.
You have to have a little
larceny in your heart
for it to work.
>>NOORY: It'd be on both sides.
>>STAVISH: Right.
So you have to have a little
bit of goodness in you
to get pulled into the goodness.
And you've got to have
a little of selfishness
to get pulled into it.
And as you stated early,
can it happen against us?
Well, it can't happen
against our will,
but it happens in gradations.
You have to get
acclimated to it.
You have to get acclimated
to the environment of either
learning how to play Pro
Football from early on up
to the pros, or you have to
get acclimated to being evil.
People don't start
out as murderers.
And psychologists
will tell you that.
>>NOORY: You're not
born a murderer.
>>STAVISH: Yeah,
you're probably not.
You may have an inclination
for it, a strong inclination,
for it like Heinrich Himmler or
Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin.
But you have to move
in that direction
and willingly engage
it at some point.
And it may start
out with just being
cruel to people to
actually hurting people
and then whatever
happens along the way.
>>NOORY: How can an
egregore, though,
be so positive and
negative at the same time?
>>STAVISH: Well,
it's not a egregore,
it's multiple egregores.
We exist in a sea of
individuals and a sea of people.
And we exist in a sea of
collective thought forms.
Look, we live in an
attention economy.
And that means I
want your attention.
You want my attention.
And the whole focus of
the internet and media
is to get your
attention, because if we
get your attention,
we get your mind.
If we get your mind,
we get your energy.
We get what you call
your prana, your chi.
We get your noumatic experience,
as the classics would call it.
So if I have your attention,
and I have your energy,
I have the potential
to influence you.
>>NOORY: What even got you
to write a book on egregores?
It's not something you wake
up in the morning and say,
this is what I'm going to do.
>>STAVISH: Well, that's
the funny part about it.
I was in Binghamton, New
York at the Lost Dog Cafe
with Joscelyn Godwin, who
is a well-known expert
and author on esotericism.
And I was just
sitting, yeah, geez,
I think I'm going to write a
monograph, just a small book
on egregores-- maybe
something limited.
I didn't think many
people would read it.
And he jokingly said,
well, thank god,
because if you don't
do it, I'll have to.
Because this was a topic
we had talked about.
And I went back home,
and I had notes.
And I wrote it, and it
just flowed perfectly.
It wasn't like any
other book I'd written.
And when it was done, it was
like Baby Bear's porridge.
It was just right.
I wanted it to be bigger.
There were things
I wanted to add.
But it just felt just as this
is perfect, right as it is.
We sent it off to
Inner Traditions, and--
>>NOORY: They loved it.
>>STAVISH: They loved it.
>>STAVISH: And I thought,
well, this is nice.
This is wonderful.
And then, bam, it took off.
I mean, it is
probably a bestseller.
>>NOORY: What's the
name of that book?
>>STAVISH: Oh,
that's "Egregores--
The Occult Entities That
Watch Over Human Destiny."
But it has just been an
endless series of interviews
on that book since it came out.
And I think it's
because it's the word.
What I mean by that is
we all have experiences
that we don't have a name for.
And it's said that the
ancient gods had two names.
One was a secret name.
And if you knew the secret
name, you could control them.
>>NOORY: Fidelio.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, that's right.
And you see that in the popular
stories about exorcism, too.
The priest is always trying
to get the demon's name.
So I get the name,
I can control it.
I can look it up
in some registry
and cast it back into
oblivion or something.
But when we have an
experience, and we
don't have a name for it,
we're a little confused.
But people who read
the book say, I get it.
That's exactly what
was happening to me.
That was exactly my experience.
And when I could
put a name to it,
I could free myself from it.
>>NOORY: Bingo.
>>STAVISH: They said, oh,
that's what I was experiencing.
It wasn't just me.
There was a process at work,
and that's the process.
>>NOORY: I had an opportunity
on "Beyond Belief"
to talk with Jonathan
Zap about thought forms,
much like what you've
been talking about.
Jonathan, what is a tulpa?
>>JONATHAN ZAP:
Well, a tulpa is--
I think it literally
means "mind-made entity"
or something like that.
And there are
different versions in
different mystical traditions.
Like in the Jewish tradition,
you talk about dybbuks.
And basically, it's where you
set out to create an entity,
not to summon one
from the other--
>>NOORY: The
individual creates it.
>>ZAP: Exactly, or sometimes
a group of individuals.
For example, there was a group
of British spiritualists,
very educated people.
And they decided to create
an entity, a human being
with a whole history.
They made up the name,
almost like a fiction writer.
>>NOORY: Create or conjure?
Two different things, right?
>>ZAP: Not conjure, create.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>ZAP: So in other
words, completely out
of their own
collective imagination.
They gave him a name.
They gave him a history.
But then they found that once
they had put enough energy
into him that he started
to have his own personality
and preferences, as if he had an
independent or autonomous life.
And this is something that
fiction writers, for example,
experience.
I'm a fiction writer myself.
After a certain
point, characters
take on a life of
their own, and they
do things that are inconvenient
to the plot of the story.
But there's a whole movement
of people right now--
there's a lot about it
online-- where people
are creating these entities
and investing them with life
and using them for different
purposes and that kind
of thing.
And after a certain point,
they seem to become autonomous.
>>NOORY: Now he sounds like
he's talking about egregores.
>>STAVISH: In a way.
>>NOORY: In his own way.
>>STAVISH: Well, in part-- and
I talk about that in the book.
What is a tulpa?
And that term comes into the
popular conversation through
Alexandra David-Nel
and her book,
"Magic and Mystery in Tibet,"
in which she talks about how she
had mentally created this monk.
And this monk-- at first,
no one could see it.
And then eventually,
they could sense it,
and then they could see it.
And, OK, well, then it
began to change and take
on characteristics of its own.
And then it wouldn't go away.
She had to dissolve it,
and it's a great effort.
And this raises a
lot of questions.
And you would ask, can
egregores influence us,
or thought forms, an individual
thought form, influence us?
And she recounts or
recalls a conversation
with a lama who said just
because we don't believe in
tigers doesn't mean
they aren't there,
and that we have to be careful
essentially of not only
the tigers of our own mind, but
the tigers of other people's
minds as well.
And when you have a lot of
people focusing on something,
it gives it life and vitality
that can get away with itself.
According to esoteric
tradition, it
can take on not only a life of
its own, but a form of its own.
>>NOORY: If you want to
influence the masses,
how would you start that?
How would you begin?
>>STAVISH: You have
to have an ideal,
something which
more people than--
can wrap themselves around
like, a Utopian ideal--
something big.
You have to have an
emotional appeal to it.
You have to make big
promises, because people
don't want small promises,
they want big ones.
>>NOORY: Do you have to
deliver on those promises?
>>STAVISH: No.
>>NOORY: Just promise them?
>>STAVISH: Just promise.
Look, we can look
at advertising.
Advertising says if you
buy this truck for $50,000,
your life is going to be better.
>>NOORY: Right.
You'll look good.
>>STAVISH: You'll look good.
>>NOORY: We'll love you.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, I mean,
it doesn't mean it happens.
Religions have been
making promises
for thousands of years,
and they don't deliver.
It's funny how many
people make promises
about the end of the world.
It doesn't happen yet.
It's, oh, I got the dates wrong.
>>NOORY: Now you sound
like a politician.
They make promises.
Do they deliver?
>>STAVISH: Well, I think
that's why politics
is such a big egregore.
And why it's so popular is they
get to lie through their teeth
about stuff.
But you make big promises.
You get a people
involved emotionally.
You make them feel
good about themselves.
You give them an
idea, and ideal.
You give them a logo.
You give them a slogan to chant,
and you're off to the races.
>>NOORY: Is the concept of
being an egregore manipulative?
>>STAVISH: It's
always restraining.
Whether it gets
manipulative or not
is a matter of whether
it's beneficial to you.
Remember, you can
join a group, and it
can be very beneficial to you.
>>NOORY: The right group.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, you join
Alcoholics Anonymous,
Weight Watchers, your local
Rotary or Kiwanis Club.
That puts limits on you
while you're in the group,
and it limits your
time, because you only
have so much time, talent,
and treasure to go around.
And you can grow
tremendously from that group.
You can grow tremendously from
some religious and spiritual
groups.
>>NOORY: What if you get
into the wrong kind of cult?
>>STAVISH: That's the problem.
It happens slowly.
And you'll know because
your identity is totally
consumed by it.
You don't have an
identity outside of it.
That's the key.
That's how you know.
And that's why they're so hard
to get rid of and get out of.
>>NOORY: I know an individual,
Mark, who was in a cult
a long, long time ago.
He got out of it.
But I can still tell
just talking to him
that there is some kind of an
effect on this guy's psyche
that hasn't gone away.
And it's almost frightening.
Nice guy-- he's
probably an empath.
But whatever happened in this
cult has convinced this guy
to believe any kind of
conspiracy he hears.
That's his downfall-- anything.
I mean, I'm not going
to cite an example,
but whatever
conspiracy, far-fetched
as it may seem, he believes it
and grasps it and won't let go.
And I think when he
was in this cult,
they created this
in this poor guy.
And he can't get rid of it.
>>STAVISH: You know, and I
hear that story so many times.
And conspiracies are a
very good example because--
>>NOORY: Some are true.
>>STAVISH: Well, of
course they're true.
I mean, we have history
to show it's true.
We're filming this on May 8, I
think, and-- whatever, May 7,
excuse me.
And that's the day the German
Armed Forces officially
surrendered to the Allied
Powers in World War II.
And yet again, we see that
that was a conspiracy.
National Socialism
was a conspiracy.
People agreed to sit around a
table at the Wannsee Conference
and murder tens of
millions of people.
And they knew they were
doing something wrong,
so they redacted the minutes
so that instead of saying,
we're transporting
them to gas chambers,
we're relocating them.
So conspiracies happen.
They're real.
>>NOORY: How could they
live with themselves?
>>STAVISH: That's the question.
I mean, when you've thrown
yourself that deeply
into-- and I don't use this
term loosely, but "evil"--
that's how.
>>NOORY: Can you
manage these egregores?
Can you control them?
>>STAVISH: You can't.
>>NOORY: You cannot?
>>STAVISH: The people
at the top control them
or think they control them.
So what you have to
do is just recognize,
is my being involved in this
group healthy to me or not?
And when it's not, you have
to learn how to get out of it.
But you can't really control it.
It's the people at the
top that control them
because that's-- because
they're hierarchical.
And remember, the people at the
top, if we go by the ancients,
they report to the
invisibles at the top.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: So that's the point.
Just as a corporation
has its president,
and the president is accountable
to the board of directors,
the board of directors
is that invisible being
or beings at the top.
So if they're saints
and bodhisattvas,
you're in good hands.
You're in good hands.
They will look out for
your best interest.
If it's not, you're
in trouble, like what
James talked about there
with demonology and goetia.
>>NOORY: Yeah, the darkness.
>>STAVISH: Darkness.
I think in terms
of conspiracy, we
need to talk about
something here,
and that is egregores
don't necessarily
have to have a central
function that we can recognize.
And that's where conspiracy
theories come in.
People connect the
dots when there may not
be a direct connection.
And they need to
make sense of things.
So most people who are obsessed
with conspiracy theories, who
are always connecting
things, are
essentially materialists when
you get right down to it.
>>NOORY: And they're easily led.
>>STAVISH: And
they're easily led.
Now in the 1980s at
Stanford Research Institute,
there was a tremendous amount
of psychic research going on.
And you know many people--
>>NOORY: Absolutely, sure.
>>STAVISH: But a lot of that
research also went into UFOs,
and it went into
computer science.
In fact, it's from Jacques
Valle that I grabbed the term
"social control mechanism,"
because it fits what
we're talking about here.
But there is some
other work at Stanford,
and that had to do with
more psychological work.
And they published
a book called,
"The Changing Images of Man."
And it's a little difficult read
and a little boring in parts,
but when you get
to the end of it,
they're talking about what
we're talking about here.
And they say that when
you have common values--
common ideals, we could say--
you don't need people to
be communicating together.
Those common values will
set the framework wherein
which they will act
pretty much the same way
in the same situation
as other people
who have those values,
even if there's
no communication between them.
So to have that
conspiracy, if you will,
you don't need someone
getting the email, the memo,
or the telegram.
What you have to
do is have shared
value structures between them.
And they can be disconnected
between time and space.
At the same time, people
who have shared values
can move between mechanisms.
They called them "hubs."
We could call them egregores--
because the value structure
share.
So when we talk about social
egregores and mental control
on the masses,
it's about what are
the common values that are being
discussed, for good or ill.
And that's how you
control people.
You don't necessarily need to
because they control themselves
at that point.
>>NOORY: I haven't heard too
much good about this, though.
>>STAVISH: Well,
that's the problem.
>>NOORY: Have you?
>>STAVISH: Only within a handful
of esoteric and spiritual
movements, because we live
in the world of duality,
and let's face it, there's a
lot of difficulty in the world,
a lot of suffering,
a lot of ignorance.
So naturally anything
that has to do with power
is unfortunately probably going
to tend towards more suffering
than good.
>>NOORY: Well,
we've talked a lot
of darkness about egregores.
Deborah King talked
about getting rid
of negative entities.
Let's take a look at
what she recommends.
>>DEBORAH KING: And I
was asleep one night.
And I woke up in the
middle of the night.
And I just knew up
there in the corner
of the room there
was a dark force.
And it taunted me.
It shook the bed.
And it hollered at me all night.
It was just terrifying.
Now this went on
for several nights.
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh.
How did you sleep?
>>KING: Well, I didn't,
and I was exhausted.
You know, they wear you
down and wear you down.
And so finally, I got smart.
I called a friend,
and I asked them
to go to the nearest
church and pick up
a crucifix and some holy water.
And that next
night, I was ready.
>>NOORY: You pulled these out?
>>KING: I did, and I just aimed.
And you can use whatever
icon works for you, whatever
your belief system might be.
And it pulled it back.
It's never been
that severe since.
>>NOORY: How could holy
water and a crucifix work?
>>STAVISH: Well, it depends
on who you ask as to why.
But ultimately, for her,
it's because it brought up
the most positive thing she
could conjure within herself.
And she had faith
and trust in it.
>>NOORY: For herself.
>>STAVISH: For herself.
And that emotional value of
confidence and faith and trust
and what it meant,
not just for her,
but the whole idea of,
of course, the church,
and the whole body and energy
of the church behind that--
that's what gives her
strength, because she
was able to get beyond
herself in a positive way.
She identified with the power
of, in this case, Christianity
in a healthy and positive way
and was able to direct that.
>>NOORY: If you
walked into a party,
could you tell if
there was a group
of egregores doing their thing?
>>STAVISH: Well,
you can, but just
as you can walk into
any group or large room
with gathering of people
and notice the cliques
and how those cliques
form around certain ways.
So think of it in
those ways, too.
You can notice it.
That's not rocket science.
But if we're looking
at spiritual entities
that affect them, that you
require a certain degree
of sensitivity to.
I've known people who are
very good at sensing it,
but they can't articulate it.
They're, as you
described, an empath.
>>NOORY: --weave through it.
>>STAVISH: Right.
They can feel it, but they
can't give you a language for it
or really know
what to do with it.
They just feel uneasy.
Or they feel happy,
and they want to stay,
or they want to go.
>>NOORY: Would you prefer to
be around positive or negative?
>>STAVISH: Oh,
positive all the time.
>>NOORY: You would?
>>STAVISH: Well, that brings
us happiness and joy in life.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>STAVISH: Pick
your company well.
>>NOORY: That's a true question.
>>STAVISH: Pick
your friends well.
Pick your company well.
Pick your spiritual groups well.
Focus on developing
yourself and then
bringing that to around you.
And don't be so concerned
about large movements
and social changes.
Always ask, what's
in this for me?
I know that sounds
selfish, but you
have to ask that, because if
you don't, you might find out
there is nothing in it for you.
It's just going to
take and take and take.
>>NOORY: Can you redirect
a negative entity
or a negative situation and
turn it into a positive?
>>STAVISH: Yes, you can.
And you see people doing
that all the time in life.
And we look at situations.
We see people come from
terrible backgrounds
and use those experiences
and the discipline
to make themselves better
people and inspirations and role
models for us.
So it's possible.
And in terms of a
negative entity,
we do see ideas
of that occurring
in religious movements.
Probably the most famous
example is in Tibetan Buddhism,
where Guru Padmasambhava is
said to have gone into Tibet
and pacified all the
evil spirits and demons
and brought them into
alignment with the Buddhist
dharma, the teachings
of Tibetan Buddhism.
So we see these evil forces
being turned into something--
according to the
story, being turned
into a service of Buddhism.
We see the same in the
various mythologies--
>>NOORY: It's not easy.
>>STAVISH: No, it's not.
And he was an exceptionally
practiced tantric or magician
to do that.
We see the same with Solomon.
King Solomon,
according to folklore,
was not just the king of Israel,
but he was a accomplished
magician-- hence, the
poetic texts with--
Jim was referring to often have
the name of "Solomon" attached
to them, even though
he didn't write them.
But the idea is that the
entire Temple of Solomon
was built by 50,000
demons which were bound
into service of the king to
produce the temple dedicated
to God.
>>NOORY: So to review,
egregores can be a grouping
of positive or negative.
It could be either one.
>>STAVISH: Correct.
And I'm sure there's
kind of neutral ones.
I'm sure we go through life
with some which are not really
that powerful, so we
don't notice them--
just relationships
that come and go.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: But the ones
we're concerned with,
that we want the viewer
to really recognize,
is those things which are
helpful to them and to know it
and those which--
they're not so good for you,
and you need to separate out.
>>NOORY: How many people
know the difference?
What's good for
them, what's not?
>>STAVISH: That's
the problem in life.
We go through life stumbling
and trying to find out.
That's why a personal
review is so important.
It's good to just sit
back every once in a while
and do a personal inventory.
>>NOORY: Of ourselves?
>>STAVISH: Of ourselves,
and then from that,
our relationships.
>>NOORY: Is that realistic?
>>STAVISH: Well, we
all have to do it
if we want to progress in life.
We have to look.
Have my thoughts, have my
words, and have my actions
brought about the
desired results?
And have those results--
if they have, they
been beneficial to me
in better understanding
my life, having a better
relationship with my
friends and family,
having a more successful
life and a healthier one,
or more importantly, even, in
my understanding of my place
in the universe, in
my divine nature?
>>NOORY: What is, in
your opinion, Mark,
the best way for someone
to change their life
and become positive?
>>STAVISH: Well, just
step away from everything
for a little while.
Separate out to let the
noise in your head calm down.
And then do a personal inventory
and look about your goals
and aspirations.
What are the things you
want to accomplish in life?
How are you going
to accomplish them?
And go about doing it.
And find a good mentor.
Find a good person--
>>NOORY: That seems
to be the key here.
>>STAVISH: It's the
key to everything.
It's the key to it all.
As I said earlier, if you're
having trouble with addiction,
and you need to be free of drugs
or alcohol or other addictions,
there's many groups
you can join.
Join them.
Find that mentor.
That mentor doesn't
have to be perfect.
All he or she has to
do is help you get free
or learn to free yourself from
those things which you're in
bondage to.
And that's what a guru does.
A guru doesn't really
have to be perfect.
They just have to help you
learn how to free yourself
from those things which keep
you in bondage and in ignorance
and suffering.
>>NOORY: How do people
get your books, Mark?
How do they find what you do?
>>STAVISH: They can easily
find them at Amazon.
They can Google it, and they'll
see a host of publications.
They can contact me
directly at the Institute
for Hermetic Studies.
And they can email
me off that site.
And if they write to me,
I'll do my best to reply.
>>NOORY: And if you came
across a group of egregores
who were positive, what
would you tell them?
>>STAVISH: I direct
people to them.
If they have an interest, and
they ask the right questions,
I say, well, these are
some groups of people that
are doing wonderful things.
You may want to consider
this teacher, that teacher,
if it's of a spiritual nature.
But if it's not, if
it's a personal--
>>NOORY: Run.
>>STAVISH: --nature--
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
And if it's not, run.
Run, yeah.
Get away.
>>NOORY: Mark, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>STAVISH: Thank
you so much, George.
It was great being here.
>>NOORY: It's fascinating.
It's a word you don't see
every day-- "egregores."
But they could be positive.
They could be negative.
The secret is to surround
yourself with the good ones.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[MYSTERIOUS MUSIC]